---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "Working with Swift Strings"
excerpt: "Exploring Swift's String methods."
categories: Swift String Language Foundation
date: 2017-07-09 00:30:00
tags: [Swift, Language, String, Foundation]
image:
  feature: swiftLogo.jpg
---

## Table of Contents

1. [Forms of Swift Strings](#forms-of-swift-strings)
1. [Extended Grapheme Clusters](#extended-grapheme-clusters)
1. [Accessing Swift Strings](#accessing-swift-strings)
    1. [Accessing Individual Characters (startIndex, endIndex)](#accessing-individual-characters-startindex-endindex)
    1. [Accessing Individual Characters (offsetBy)](#accessing-individual-characters-offsetby)
    1. [Accessing the Entire String with Loops](#accessing-the-entire-string-with-loops)
1. [Swift String Insert and Remove](#swift-string-insert-remove)
1. [Prefix and Suffix](#prefix-and-suffix)
1. [Substring](#substring)

## Forms of Swift Strings

In this post, we'll explore Swift's String and its various forms. In Swift, you can represent a string like this:

```swift
let str = "hello"
```

In previous versions of Swift (Swift 3), you could only define single-line strings. However, in Swift 4, you can create multi-line strings using triple quotes (`"""`).

```swift
let multiLine = """
The White Rabbit put on his spectacles, "Where shall I begin, please begin your Majesty?" he asked.

"Begin at the beginning,"

    Indentation is included.
        Another indent
"""

print(multiLine)

/* Output:
The White Rabbit put on his spectacles, "Where shall I begin, please begin your Majesty?" he asked.

"Begin at the beginning,"

    Indentation is included.
        Another indent
*/
```

Leading white space in multi-line strings is omitted when printing. However, if indentation occurs after the starting sentence, it will be included.

## Extended Grapheme Clusters

In Swift, one character represents a "Single Extended Grapheme Cluster." Extended Grapheme Clusters represent human-readable characters, and this concept applies not only to English but also to other languages. For example, consider Korean characters:

```swift
let precomposed: Character = "\u{D55C}"                  // 한
let decomposed: Character = "\u{1112}\u{1161}\u{11AB}"   // ᄒ, ᅡ, ᆫ
// Both represent the Character "한."
```

Surprisingly, `decomposed` consists of three scalars. In Extended Grapheme Clusters, it's not a one-to-one mapping where one Character equals one scalar. This is why it's challenging to access strings by index. Each Character can consist of one or more scalars, making it challenging to allocate consistent memory sizes per Character, which makes index-based access impossible.

*Note: Extended Grapheme Clusters in Swift allow intuitive representation of various languages, but their variable sizes make direct index-based access to a String impossible.*

## Accessing Swift Strings

In Swift, accessing individual characters using `String[Int]` is challenging. Instead, Swift provides methods for such access. Two essential methods are `startIndex` and `endIndex`.

### Accessing Individual Characters (startIndex, endIndex)

```swift
let str = "Hello"

print(str.startIndex) // Index(_base: Swift.String.UnicodeScalarView.Index(_position: 0), _countUTF16: 1)
print(str.endIndex) // Index(_base: Swift.String.UnicodeScalarView.Index(_position: 5), _countUTF16: 0)
```

In the above example, `str.startIndex` returns `0`, and `str.endIndex` returns `5`. Be cautious, as `endIndex` is `5`, not `4`. While "Hello" has five characters, indexing starts from `0` and goes up to `4`, but `endIndex` is `5`, indicating the length of the entire string. Thus, `str[str.endIndex]` results in an error. To access the last character, you need to use an index before `endIndex`.

Swift provides methods like `str.index(before:)` and `str.index(after:)` for accessing characters before and after `endIndex`. To access the last character, you can use `str.index(before: str.endIndex)`.

### Accessing Individual Characters (offsetBy)

To access characters in the middle of a string, you can use the `index(_:offsetBy:)` method.

*Note: The `offsetBy` method returns a position by adding a given integer value to the starting position.*

```swift
let str = "Hello World"

print(str[str.index(str.startIndex, offsetBy: 0)]) // H
print(str[str.index(str.startIndex, offsetBy: 6)]) // W

print(str[str.index(str.endIndex, offsetBy: -1)]) // d
print(str[str.index(str.endIndex, offsetBy: -3)]) // r
```

In the examples above, the first two print statements access characters at specific offsets from the `startIndex`. The last two statements access characters from the `endIndex`. Negative values indicate positions counting from the end.

### Accessing the Entire String with Loops

You can also access a string using loops in three ways. The first way accesses individual characters using `str`.

```swift
let str = "Hello"

for char in str {
  print(char) // H e l l o (each character)
}
```

The second way accesses indices using `indices`.

```swift
for index in str.indices {
  // Accesses indices generated by Swift, not integers.
  print(index) // Index(_base: Swift.String.UnicodeScalarView.Index(_position: 0), _countUTF16: 1)...
}
```

The last way accesses both indices and individual characters simultaneously.

```swift
for (index, value) in str.enumerated() {
    // index is an integer.
    print("index: \(index), value : \(value)")  // index: 0, value: H
}
```

## Swift String Insert and Remove

Swift's String insertion specifies what content to insert and where to insert it. The methods for this purpose are `insert(_:at:)` and `insert(contentsOf:at:)`.

```swift
let str = "Hello"

str.insert("A", at: str.startIndex) // Result: AHello
str.insert(contentsOf: " World", at: str.endIndex) // Result: AHello World
```

For inserting individual characters, you don't need to use `contentsOf`.

String removal is similar to insertion but specifies where and what to remove. The methods are `remove(_:at:)` and `removeSubrange(_:)`.

```swift
let str = "AHello World"

str.remove(at: str.startIndex) // Result: Hello World

let rangeOfWorld = str.index(str.endIndex, offsetBy: -6)..<str.endIndex
str.removeSubrange(rangeOfWorld) // Result: Hello
```

Be cautious when using `remove(_:at:)

` with ranges. Ranges must be specified using `String.index` or `str.endIndex`.

## Prefix and Suffix

The `hasPrefix(_:)` and `hasSuffix(_:)` methods check if a string starts with or ends with a specific substring, respectively.

```swift
var s = "한글"

if s[s.startIndex] == "한" {
    print("The first character is '한'.")
}
if s.hasPrefix("한") {
    print("The first character is '한'.")
}

if s.hasSuffix("한글") {
    print("The last characters are '한글'.")
}
```

## Substring

`Substring` represents a part of a string.

```swift
let str = "Hello World"
let range = str[str.startIndex...str.index(str.startIndex, offsetBy: 4)]
let subStr = str[range]
```

The `subStr` in this example refers to a part of the original string without allocating new memory. This memory reuse reduces memory allocation costs. However, this approach is not suitable for long-term storage of strings. For long-term storage, it's better to create a new string.

---

## References
* Apple Inc. The Swift Programming Language (Swift 4 Beta)